Query Results Cookbook (#1193)
databrickslabs/dqx: docs/dqx/docs/reference/query_cookbook.mdx

<Admonition type="note" title="Which table to query">
Use this table to find the right place to look depending on your setup:

| What I'm looking for | With quarantine configured | Without quarantine |
|---|---|---|
| Rows with errors | `quarantine_table` | `output_table` where `_errors IS NOT NULL` |
| Rows with warnings | `quarantine_table` | `output_table` where `_warnings IS NOT NULL` |
| Clean rows | `output_table` | `output_table` where both are null |

The recipes below assume quarantine is configured. If it isn't, substitute `output_table` for `quarantine_table` and add the filter from the table above.
</Admonition>

## 1. A quick peek at each table

**Goal**: Get familiar with the shape and grain of each table before writing any joins.

Before any joins, it is good to look at what is actually in each table. One row of each table tells you the grain of what a single row represents, which is the foundation for every aggregation you will write later.

### SQL

```sql
-- Summary metrics: one row per metric per run
SELECT * FROM catalog.schema.summary_metrics LIMIT 5;

> -- Output: clean rows only (no _errors or _warnings columns)

Reviewer: Maybe we should modify "clean rows" to be more specific that these are rows with no errors?

SELECT * FROM catalog.schema.output_table LIMIT 5;

-- Quarantine: rows with any errors or warnings, with _errors and _warnings populated
SELECT * FROM catalog.schema.quarantine_table LIMIT 5;

-- Checks: one row per check definition
SELECT * FROM catalog.schema.checks_table LIMIT 5;
```

### PySpark

```python
display(spark.table("catalog.schema.summary_metrics").limit(5))
display(spark.table("catalog.schema.output_table").limit(5))
display(spark.table("catalog.schema.quarantine_table").limit(5))
display(spark.table("catalog.schema.checks_table").limit(5))

> ```

Reviewer: Tabs might be useful for the different languages:

```
<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="SQL" label="SQL" default>
    SQL code block here
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="Python" label="Python" default>
    Python code block here
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
```

**What to notice:**

> - `summary_metrics` is in long format, one row per metric. To get a wide view, pivot on `metric_name` (recipe 7).

Reviewer: Should be one row per metric per run.

> - `summary_metrics` is in long format, one row per metric. To get a wide view, pivot on `metric_name` (recipe 7).

Reviewer: It would be good to have an example summary metrics table query with a `PIVOT` clause to get the error count, warning count, total row count, etc. grouped by run, day, or some other combination of identifier fields.

> - Output and quarantine rows look like your original data plus two array columns: `_errors` and `_warnings`. Each array element is a struct describing one issue.

Reviewer: Maybe change "one issue" to "one failed DQX check"

---

> sidebar_position: 506

Reviewer 2: The cookbook declares sidebar_position: 506, but docs/dqx/docs/reference/api/index.mdx already uses 506. The ordering in the sidebar will be undefined between them. Pick something like 506.5 or 508 (the next free slot is 508 — benchmarks.mdx uses 507).

> title: Lineage Query Cookbook

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Query Cookbook
```
i think lineage here is a bit confusing

---

import Admonition from '@theme/Admonition';
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Lineage Query Cookbook

> This cookbook is a collection of copy-paste queries for the DQX result tables: summary metrics, output, quarantine, and checks. It assumes you've already run DQX at least once and have the tables in your catalog.

Reviewer 2: We need to describe first what is the intent of this guide.
```suggestion
This cookbook is a practical guide for querying DQX result tables — summary metrics, output, quarantine, and checks — to trace errors and warnings across runs, rows, and check definitions. It will help you go from a failing run to the rows that failed, link those rows back to the rules that flagged them, and monitor quality trends across runs. It assumes you've already run DQX at least once.
```

<Admonition type="info" title="Table name placeholders">
The examples below use these placeholder table names. Please replace them with your actual catalog, schema, and table names:

- `catalog.schema.output_table` - output table
- `catalog.schema.quarantine_table` - quarantine table (when configured)
- `catalog.schema.checks_table` - checks storage table
- `catalog.schema.summary_metrics` - summary metrics table
- `catalog.schema.my_table` - the input table being checked (used in Recipes 8 and 9)

The default error and warning column names are `_errors` and `_warnings`.
If you [customized](/docs/guide/additional_configuration/#customizing-result-columns) them, adjust the queries accordingly.
</Admonition>

## Where to start

Pick the row that matches what you already have, and jump to the recipe that uses it.

| What you have | What you want | Go to |
|---|---|---|
| A `run_id` | The rows that failed in that run | [2. Summary to Row-Level Errors](#2-summary-to-row-level-errors) |

> | A `run_id` | The rule set that was applied | [4. Summary to Checks Table](#4-summary-to-checks-table) |

Reviewer 2: explain what a rule set is: collection of rules that are applied together in a single run

New to the tables? Start with **[Recipe 1 - A quick peek at each table](#1-a-quick-peek-at-each-table)** for orientation.

<Admonition type="note" title="Which table to query">
Use this table to find the right place to look depending on your setup:

| What I'm looking for | With quarantine configured | Without quarantine |
|---|---|---|
| Rows with errors | `quarantine_table` | `output_table` where `_errors IS NOT NULL` |
| Rows with warnings | `quarantine_table` | `output_table` where `_warnings IS NOT NULL` |
| Clean rows | `output_table` | `output_table` where both are null |

The recipes below assume quarantine is configured. If it isn't, substitute `output_table` for `quarantine_table` and add the filter from the table above.
</Admonition>

## 1. A quick peek at each table

**Goal**: Get familiar with the shape and grain of each table before writing any joins.

Before any joins, it is good to look at what is actually in each table. One row of each table tells you the grain of what a single row represents, which is the foundation for every aggregation you will write later.

<Tabs>
    <TabItem value="SQL" label="SQL" default>
```sql

>     -- Summary metrics: one row per metric per run

Reviewer 2: Inconsistent code-block indentation across recipes. Several recipes have leading 4-space (or more) indent INSIDE the code blocks — e.g., Recipe 1 SQL starts at column 5, Recipe 2 SQL starts at column 9, Recipe 5 Python is at column 9. In Docusaurus these render as indented code (the indent is preserved). Some recipes also mix indentation within a single block. Pass through the file with a formatter or trim leading whitespace consistently to column 1.

    SELECT * FROM catalog.schema.summary_metrics LIMIT 5;

    -- Output: rows without any errors (no _errors or _warnings columns)
    SELECT * FROM catalog.schema.output_table LIMIT 5;

    -- Quarantine: rows with any errors or warnings, with _errors and _warnings populated
    SELECT * FROM catalog.schema.quarantine_table LIMIT 5;

    -- Checks: one row per check definition
    SELECT * FROM catalog.schema.checks_table LIMIT 5;
    ```
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="Python" label="Python">
        ```python
        display(spark.table("catalog.schema.summary_metrics").limit(5))
        display(spark.table("catalog.schema.output_table").limit(5))
        display(spark.table("catalog.schema.quarantine_table").limit(5))
        display(spark.table("catalog.schema.checks_table").limit(5))
        ```
    </TabItem>

</Tabs>

**What to notice:**

> - `summary_metrics` is in long format, one row per metric per run. To get a wide view, pivot on `metric_name` (recipe 7).

Reviewer 2: Please link the summary metrics guide: https://databrickslabs.github.io/dqx/docs/guide/summary_metrics/
Summary metrics must be explicitely enabled. It is not there by default.

> - Output and quarantine rows look like your original data plus two array columns: `_errors` and `_warnings`. Each array element is a struct describing one failed DQX check.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Output and quarantine rows contain your original data plus two array columns: `_errors` and `_warnings`. Each array element is a struct describing one failed DQX check.
```

- The checks table has a `rule_fingerprint` (a hash of one individual rule's definition - its function, arguments, and criticality) and a `rule_set_fingerprint` (a hash of the entire collection of rules active during a run). Both fingerprints appear inside each error and warning struct, which is how recipes 3 and 4 join back to the checks table.

## 2. Summary to Row-Level Errors

**Goal**: Given a run in the summary metrics table, use its `run_id` to find the rows that failed.

Start by getting a `run_id` from the summary table. Every recipe that takes a `run_id` as input begins here.

<Tabs>
    <TabItem value="SQL" label="SQL" default>
        ```sql
        -- Step 1: get a run_id. Adjust the filter or ordering to select a different run.
        SELECT

>         run_id,

Reviewer 2: use proper identation to format SQL better

        LATERAL VIEW explode(t._warnings) AS w
        ) runs ON sm.run_id = runs.run_id
        ORDER BY sm.run_time DESC;
        ```
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="Python" label="Python">
        ```python
        import pyspark.sql.functions as F

        quarantine_df = spark.table("catalog.schema.quarantine_table")
        error_run_ids = (
            quarantine_df
            .select(F.explode(F.col("_errors")).alias("result"))
            .select(F.expr("result.*"))
            .select("run_id")
        )
        warning_run_ids = (
            quarantine_df
            .select(F.explode(F.col("_warnings")).alias("result"))
            .select(F.expr("result.*"))
            .select("run_id")
        )
        run_ids_df = error_run_ids.union(warning_run_ids).distinct()

        summary_df = spark.table("catalog.schema.summary_metrics")
        result_df = summary_df.join(run_ids_df, on="run_id")

        display(result_df)
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

### To Checks Table

**Goal**: From a failing row, get the full check definition (function, arguments, filter) that produced the failure.

<Admonition type="note" title="for_each_column rules">

> Rules defined with `for_each_column` are stored as a single row in the checks table but expand into one error entry per column at runtime, each with its own `rule_fingerprint`. These per-column fingerprints do not match the parent row in the checks table, so those errors will not appear in the join results below. To inspect the originating rule for those errors, match on `rule_set_fingerprint` and `check.function` instead.

Reviewer 2: Not sure the workaround will really work. To inspect the parent rule for those errors, I think you would need to query the checks table directly with `c.check.for_each_column IS NOT NULL` and match by `rule_set_fingerprint + check.function + column membership` (see Recipe 6 for listing all active rules in a run). That would tell the reader the join doesn't work, points them to Recipe 6 as the alternative path (list all rules, find the `for_each_column` ones manually)

        ORDER BY run_time DESC;
        ```
    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="Python" label="Python">
        ```python
        import pyspark.sql.functions as F

        summary_df = spark.table("catalog.schema.summary_metrics")

        trend_df = (
            summary_df.filter(
                F.col("metric_name").isin("input_row_count", "valid_row_count", "error_row_count", "warning_row_count")
            )
            .groupBy("run_id", "run_time", "input_location")
            .pivot("metric_name")
            .agg(F.first(F.col("metric_value").cast("double")))
            .withColumn(
                "error_rate_pct",
                F.round(F.col("error_row_count") / F.col("input_row_count") * 100, 2),
            )
            .orderBy(F.col("run_time").desc())
        )

        display(trend_df)
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

<Admonition type="tip" title="Alerting on trends">
Use Databricks SQL Alerts on the run tracking
query to get notified when error rates exceed a threshold. See [Summary Metrics](/docs/guide/summary_metrics/#monitoring-and-alerting-using-metrics-table)
for more on monitoring best practices.
</Admonition>

> ## 8. Scoping to One Table

Reviewer 2: We need a better title here. The title tells little about this recipe.

> **Goal**: When DQX runs checks across multiple tables in a single call, the metrics table contains rows for all of them. Filter by `input_location` to scope any query to a single table's runs.

Reviewer 2: Please rewrite, this is hard to read and understand. We should explain that summary metrics centralize data quality in a single table that is why it typically contain results from multiple tables. Therefore, we can use input location to filter the results to the specific target table.

        SELECT DISTINCT input_location
        FROM catalog.schema.summary_metrics
        ORDER BY input_location;

        -- Get the latest run for one specific input table
        SELECT
        run_id,
        run_time,
        input_location,
        output_location,
        quarantine_location,
        checks_location,
        rule_set_fingerprint
        FROM catalog.schema.summary_metrics
        WHERE input_location = 'catalog.schema.my_table'
        ORDER BY run_time DESC
        LIMIT 1;
        ```
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="Python" label="Python">
        ```python
        import pyspark.sql.functions as F

        summary_df = spark.table("catalog.schema.summary_metrics")

        # List all tracked input tables
        summary_df.select("input_location").distinct().orderBy("input_location").display()

        # Get the latest run for a specific table
        latest = (
            summary_df
            .filter(F.col("input_location") == "catalog.schema.my_table")
            .orderBy(F.col("run_time").desc())
            .first()
        )
        run_id = latest["run_id"]
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## 9. Checks by Run Config

> **Goal**: When multiple tables share a single checks table (partitioned by `run_config_name`), list the available run configs and load the rules for a specific one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Goal**: When multiple input tables share a single checks table (partitioned by `run_config_name`), list the available run configs and load the rules for a specific one.
```

> `run_config_name` is the partition key written by `save_checks`. The default value is `"default"`. When checks for different tables are saved to the same checks table with distinct `run_config_name` values (e.g. the table name), you must use the same value at load time or `load_checks` returns empty.

Reviewer 2: It's technically not a partition column — run_config_name STRING is as a regular column. Calling it a partition key may mislead users into expecting partition pruning. I suggest: "the logical group identifier written by save_checks" or "the filter column used by load_checks".

            .filter(F.col("metric_name") == "check_metrics")
            .select(
                "run_id",
                "run_time",
                F.explode(F.from_json(F.col("metric_value"), check_metrics_schema)).alias("cm"),
            )
            .select("run_id", "run_time", F.col("cm.check_name"), F.col("cm.error_count"))
            .filter(F.col("error_count") > 0)
            .groupBy("check_name")
            .agg(
                F.min("run_time").alias("first_failure_time"),
                F.min_by("run_id", "run_time").alias("first_failure_run_id"),
            )
            .orderBy(F.col("first_failure_time").desc())
        )

        display(first_failures_df)
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## 11. All Failures per Check

**Goal**: Given a check name, find every quarantine row that failed that check across all runs.

Recipe 10 tells you *when* a check first failed. This one gives you the rows. Replace `<your_check_name>` with the value from the `name` column in the error struct - the same value Recipe 5 surfaces under `e.name`.

<Tabs>
    <TabItem value="SQL" label="SQL" default>
        ```sql

>         SELECT

Reviewer 2: SQL and Python produce different output shapes. The SQL version keeps _errors/_warnings columns in the result `(SELECT t.*, e.run_id, ...)`, but the Python explicitly `.drop("_errors", "_warnings", "e")`. Users picking one tab vs. the other get different DataFrames. Pick one — I'd lean toward keeping them in both (preserves all original context) and removing the `.drop(...)` from Python.

`summary_metrics` stores one row per metric per run. Pivoting turns those rows into columns, making it straightforward to compare `input_row_count`, `error_row_count`, `warning_row_count`, and `valid_row_count` side by side. The second query groups by day instead of individual run - useful for dashboards and trend charts that extend Recipe 7.

<Tabs>
    <TabItem value="SQL" label="SQL" default>
        ```sql
        -- One row per run, metrics as columns.
        SELECT *
        FROM (
            SELECT run_id, run_time, metric_name, CAST(metric_value AS BIGINT) AS metric_value
            FROM catalog.schema.summary_metrics
            WHERE metric_name IN ('input_row_count', 'error_row_count', 'warning_row_count', 'valid_row_count')
        )
        PIVOT (
            MAX(metric_value)
            FOR metric_name IN ('input_row_count', 'error_row_count', 'warning_row_count', 'valid_row_count')
        )
        ORDER BY run_time DESC;

        -- Same shape but grouped by day, swap DATE_TRUNC granularity as needed.
        SELECT
            DATE_TRUNC('day', run_time) AS run_day,

>             MAX(CASE WHEN metric_name = 'input_row_count' THEN CAST(metric_value AS BIGINT) END) AS input_row_count,

Reviewer 2: This is unusual — SUM is more common for "how many rows did we process today total". The comment "highest row counts per day across all runs" reads as intentional, but it would help to spell out why you'd want max vs. sum (e.g., "the largest single run that day, useful for capacity planning" vs. "total volume").
